JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
Democrats in the House of
Representatives
literally take control of the
floor, with
a sit-in protest demanding votes
on gun control.
GWEN IFILL: Also ahead this
Wednesday: Britain
remains divided ahead of
tomorrow's historic
referendum over whether to leave
the European
Union. Malcolm Brabant in London
listens to
the voters.
LINDA DUFFIN, Financial
Journalist: I do think
a lot of Brexiters have
essentially got their
fingers in their ears and they
are going la,
la, la, la, la, because if we
leave Europe,
on what terms do we then do
business with
Europe?
WOMAN: One hundred percent out.
My dad, his
dad, my grandparents all fought
to keep this
country British.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And the shrinking
of America's
middle class. I talk with IMF
head Christine
Lagarde about why the numbers
are lagging
and how the country can build
itself back
up.
CHRISTINE LAGARDE, Managing
Director, International
Monetary Fund: If you look at
the size of
the middle class in 1975, it was
roughly 60
percent of total population. If
you look at
the middle class today, it is
about 50 percent.
GWEN IFILL: All that and more on
tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The politics
around guns in
the U.S. took a dramatic turn
today, with
an almost unprecedented sit-in
on the floor
of the House of Representatives.
Nearly 100 Democrats are
refusing to leave
the chamber until they secure a
vote on a
gun control bill.
REP. JOHN LEWIS (D), Georgia:
The time for
silence is over.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The extraordinary
protest came
in the wake of the mass shooting
in Orlando,
the goal, to force a vote on
legislation that
would prevent anyone on the
government's terrorist
and no-fly lists from being
allowed to buy
a gun.
REP. JOHN LEWIS: We are calling
on the leadership
of the House to bring
commonsense gun control
legislation to the House floor.
Give us a vote. Let us vote.
MAN: This cannot stand. We will
occupy this
floor.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Democrats
continued to chant
and sit on the floor, as
Republicans gaveled
for order and called a recess,
bringing legislative
business to a halt.
MAN: The chair declares the
House in recess
the hour of 12 noon.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That meant the
official House
cameras went dark, so Democrats
took to social
media to share photos of the
sit-in.
Representative Debbie Wasserman
Schultz teared
up reading a letter from former
Representative
Gabby Giffords, herself the
victim of a shooting.
REP. DEBBIE WASSERMAN SCHULTZ
(D), Florida:
Speaking is difficult for me,
but I haven't
been silenced, and neither
should the American
people. And we will be here and
sit in and
stand strong until we can make
sure there
are no more guns, no more
Orlando, no more
Aurora, no more victims. Thank
you so much.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Outside the
chamber, Minority
Leader Nancy Pelosi rallied
support in front
of cameras and blamed the
Republican leaders
for not bring any gun
legislation to the floor.
Later, she underlined the sit-in
will continue
until a vote is called, adding,
"We are in
for the long haul here."
President Obama voiced his
support for the
effort in a tweet.
For their part, Republican
leaders have not
commented, nor signaled plans
for the House
to reconvene.
GWEN IFILL: In the day's other
news, the Justice
Department has completed the
largest-ever
takedown of Medicare scammers.
Today, the
agency announced it has charged
300 people,
including doctors and other
health care professionals,
with defrauding Medicare of $900
million.
The cases include
money-laundering, billing
for unnecessary treatments, and
identity theft
to obtain prescriptions. Donald
Trump launched
a full-frontal assault against
his Democratic
opponent, Hillary Clinton, today
in yet another
pre-general election campaign
salvo.
John Yang has the story.
JOHN YANG: The gloves were off
in the presidential
campaign trail today, as Donald
Trump and
Hillary Clinton traded barbs
from 500 miles
apart.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
Hillary Clinton may be the most
corrupt person
ever to seek the presidency of
the United
States.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
Look, I know Donald hates it
when anyone points
out how hollow his sales pitch
really is.
(LAUGHTER)
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: He's
going after me
personally because he has no
answers on the
substance.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JOHN YANG: In New York this
morning, Trump
delivered a blistering attack on
Clinton.
He hit her on her character.
DONALD TRUMP: As you know, she
-- most people
know she's a world-class liar.
JOHN YANG: And on her
immigration proposals.
DONALD TRUMP: Under her plan, we
would admit
hundreds of thousands of
refugees from the
most dangerous countries on
Earth, with no
way to screen who they are, what
they are,
what they believe, where they
come from.
JOHN YANG: That last claim about
screening
refugees isn't new, but
PolitiFact has rated
it false, citing the current
federal system,
a process that typically takes
between one
and two years.
In a sign of what the four
months until Election
Day may be like, the Clinton
campaign quickly
issued a list of what they say
are the top
15 inaccurate statements in
Trump's speech.
Speaking in Raleigh, North
Carolina, Clinton
responded personally.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: He has
no real strategy
for creating jobs, just a string
of empty
promises.
And maybe we shouldn't expect
better from
someone whose most famous words
are, "You're
fired."
Well, here's what I want you to
know. I do
have a jobs program, and, as
president, I'm
going to make sure that you
hear, you're hired.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JOHN YANG: Clinton also got some
bipartisan
signs of support, an endorsement
from Republican
national security expert Brent
Scowcroft,
and a rousing welcome from House
Democrats
in a meeting on Capitol Hill.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
GWEN IFILL: And dropping out of
the presidential
race and into a Senate race,
Marco Rubio announced
he's now changed his mind and
will run for
reelection to the Senate from
Florida. Rubio
said it is important to run
again because
control of the Senate could come
down to the
Florida race. And he pledged to
stand up to
the next president, even if it
is Donald Trump.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Former U.S. House
Speaker Dennis
Hastert reported to a Minnesota
prison today
to begin a 15-month sentence.
The 74-year-old
pleaded guilty in a hush money
case that revealed
he sexually abused high school
boys decades
ago.
Hastert, who has numerous health
issues, arrived
at the Rochester Federal Medical
Center this
afternoon in a wheelchair. The
facility specializes
in care for ailing inmates.
GWEN IFILL: Colombia's
government and the
leftist FARC rebel group have
agreed on a
cease-fire deal that would end
more than a
half-century of fighting. Under
the agreement
roughly 7,000 FARC rebels will
surrender their
weapons and step away from the
fight.
The conflict has claimed the
lives of over
220,000 people, and displaced
millions more.
The deal is expected to be
signed tomorrow.
JUDY WOODRUFF: There's new
concern North Korea's
latest back-to-back missile
tests mean it's
closer to being able to hit U.S.
bases in
Asia and the Pacific. The North
appears to
have successfully launched one
of its mid-range
ballistic missiles for the first
time this
morning, hours after a similar
test failed.
The test was the sixth in just
the last two
months. It traveled more than
halfway to Japan,
before plunging into the sea.
GWEN IFILL: India's monsoon
season is off
to a deadly start. Lightning
strikes killed
at least 74 people within the
last 24 hours.
Storms are raging throughout the
country's
eastern and northern regions.
Most of the
deaths occurred in the eastern
state of Bihar;
2,000 people are fatally struck
by lightning
in India each year. But the
recent spate of
deaths, mostly farm workers in
open fields,
is higher than usual.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Two sick workers
at a remote
U.S. research station at the
South Pole have
been evacuated after a risky
operation in
extremely frigid, pitch-black
conditions.
They were rescued by a small
Canadian plane
and flown to a British research
station in
Antarctica. Photos from the
National Science
Foundation show the crew
preparing to leave
with the evacuees. They are now
being flown
to Chile for medical treatment.
GWEN IFILL: Golf star Rory
McIlroy has pulled
out of August's Olympic Games in
Rio de Janeiro,
citing fears over the Zika
virus. In a statement,
the 27-year-old Irishman said:
"My health
and my family's health comes
before anything
else." McIlroy becomes one of
the highest-profile
athletes to drop out of the
Olympics over
explicitly stated Zika concerns.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On Wall Street
today, stocks
fell in anticipation of
tomorrow's British
referendum on whether to remain
in the European
Union. The Dow Jones industrial
average lost
nearly 49 points to close at
17780. The Nasdaq
fell 10 points, and the S&P 500
dropped three.
GWEN IFILL: And the city of
Cleveland celebrated
its basketball team's national
championship
today. The team beat the Golden
State Warriors
Sunday, to end the city's
52-year winning
sports drought. Members of the
team, including
the NBA final's most valuable
player, LeBron
James, paraded through the
streets of Cleveland.
Hundreds of thousands of fans
were on hand.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Still to come on
the "NewsHour":
what residents in Britain are
saying on the
eve of the Brexit vote; IMF
chief Christine
Lagarde on the diminishing
American middle
class; President Obama signs a
major overhaul
for chemical safety rules; and
much more.
GWEN IFILL: Voters in the United
Kingdom head
to the polls tomorrow to make a
momentous
decision on their future. Will
they remain
a part of the European Union, or
strike out
on their own?
"NewsHour" special correspondent
Malcolm Brabant
has been talking to people in
the East of
England. He brings us this
report.
MALCOLM BRABANT: With local
polls suggesting
that most East Anglians favor
Brexit, the
remain campaigners cranked up
their polite
offensive in the market town of
Ipswich.
MAN: What do you think about it?
Are you going
to vote yes?
TIAH BENJAMIN, Student: Yes, I'm
going to
vote to remain, because I don't
really see
the point in not voting to
remain, because
you literally lose like so much.
WOMAN: Hi. Will you be voting
next Thursday?
Do you know which way you're
going to vote?
WOMAN: Yes. Remain.
WOMAN: Remain. Fantastic,
excellent.
WOMAN: Out.
WOMAN: Definitely out. OK. Do
you want to
talk about it?
WOMAN: Shut that bloody channel
tunnel up,
mate.
WOMAN: Really?
WOMAN: Yes, absolutely, concrete
it up.
WOMAN: OK.
WOMAN: Yes.
WOMAN: I think (INAUDIBLE) for
our country.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But her
suggestion that immigration
made the country's foundation
stronger met
a sharp response.
WOMAN: My husband served 27
years in the military,
and what have we got to show for
it? Nothing.
Fighting to keep them out,
definitely out,
absolutely, 100 percent, 100
percent out.
My dad, his dad, my grandparents
all fought
to keep this country British.
MALCOLM BRABANT: So, is Britain
about to chime
in with a painful divorce, after
an often
turbulent, fractious, and
skeptical 43-year
union with her neighbors across
the North
Sea, and declare independence
day?
At this gentle summer garden
party in the
village of Hoxne, in amongst the
cream teas,
one of the key referendum issues
reared its
head in an almost visceral
manner.
PETER LOCKETT, Retired
Electrician: I think
we should stop immigration and
not allow any
more people in the country. I
think there's
far too many as well pinching
our money for
national health and all that
sort of thing.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Next to the
sausage stand,
the conversation switched to
national sovereignty
and the deep resentment many
Britons feel
about the amount of control
exerted by unelected
European commissioners and their
unaccountable
staff in Brussels.
STUART JARROLD, Sports Reporter:
Every year,
every day, every hour, we are
spending so
much money with faceless
individuals who -- we
can't even govern ourselves. Why
can't we,
as a nation, run our own
country?
ANTHONY BENTON, Great Britain:
In the long
run, if the human race is going
to exist to
survive on this planet that
we're wrecking,
then we need to come together
and work together.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Karon Saunders
is a truly
international woman with part
Italian heritage
who's worked around the world.
But she will
vote to leave. She says
excessive E.U. regulation
is endangering her small organic
free-range
farm. She struggles to get her
animals into
abattoirs that favor industrial
food producers,
has given up breeding turkeys
and has lost
money because of E.U. rules
governing slaughtering.
KARON SAUNDERS, Organic Farmer:
I don't want
people's employment rights, I
don't want their
human rights changed. I don't
want that to
be lessened. And I don't think
it will.
What I do want is to be able to
look at legislation
in a realistic manner. We may be
able to put
in the small slaughter houses,
have that working
for us, rather than working
against us. Why
do we need a vet to stand over
people who
for centuries have always killed
the animals
usually at the back of the
butcher's or at
home? There are legislations and
there are
ways that we can work that our
standards don't
drop.
LINDA DUFFIN, Financial
Journalist: I do think
a lot of Brexiters have
essentially got their
fingers in their ears and they
are going la,
la, la, la, la, because if we
leave Europe,
on what terms do we then do
business with
Europe?
MALCOLM BRABANT: Mrs. Portly has
spoken. That's
the name financial journalist
Linda Duffin
uses when she blogs about food.
LINDA DUFFIN: My concerns are
the potential
for a drop in trade and investor
uncertainty.
If you look at the figures, 42
percent of
our exports are to the E.U., 48
our foreign direct trade is from
the E.U.
Essentially, if we leave the
E.U., we will
have to toe the line, but we
won't have any
say in where that line is drawn.
NARRATOR: Every week, the United
Kingdom sends
350 million pounds of taxpayers
money to the
E.U. That's the cost of a fully
staffed brand-new
hospital.
GORDON BROWN, Former British
Prime Minister:
I'm walking through the remains
of Coventry
Cathedral, bombed and destroyed
by Nazi warplanes
75 years ago, and now
painstakingly and lovingly
maintained as a monument to wars
that we have
left behind and to the sanctuary
of peace.
And what message would we send
to the rest
of the world if we, the British
people, the
most internationally minded of
all, were to
walk away from our nearest
neighbors? We should
be leading in Europe, and not
leaving it.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Nostalgia for
Britain's fighting
spirit during the Second World
War is never
far away at Frinton-on-Sea,
where a portrait
of Winston Churchill adorns the
railway station.
Frinton, a bastion of gentility
and snobbishness,
has frequently rebelled against
convention
and common causes. When
Churchill promised
that Britain would fight
Hitler's Germany
on the beaches, there was the
following response.
CHRIS OPPERMAN, Frinton-on-Sea:
Frinton Parish
Council cabled Whitehall and
said, "Not on
our beaches, you're not."
(LAUGHTER)
MALCOLM BRABANT: A Second World
War machine
gun nest is part of the fabric
of Frinton
Station, and for the remain
campaign symbolizes
the bunker mentality of the
Brexiters.
Chris Opperman, a former pig
farmer and broadcaster,
was going to vote to remain, but
changed his
mind.
CHRIS OPPERMAN: I believe
England is better
off by itself, because we have
the drive and
tenacity to make up for any of
the so-called
benefits. I believe the
engineering powerhouse
is still locked away somewhere
in Britain.
I have been inspired by some
impassioned speeches
by employers of small factories,
major employers
as well, who've said, we can get
on, we don't
have to have the -- what they
call the feather
bed of Europe to push our
exports.
MALCOLM BRABANT: during the
course of this
campaign, the lead has changed
hands. According
to the latest opinion polls,
though, both
sides are running neck and neck.
But during recent campaigns,
such surveys
have been proved to be fallible,
because people
have sought to mislead the
pollsters. And
so it's far too risky to predict
the outcome.
Watching from the sidelines as
Britain tears
itself apart are immigrants from
Eastern Europe,
who're concerned about a
campaign that some
say featured a xenophobic edge.
These are
some of the 5,000 Poles who live
in Ipswich.
Student Julia Rusek:
JULIA RUSEK, Polish Student:
It's quite hurtful
that people like me get blamed
for things
like the fall of the -- the fall
the England.
And apparently we're stealing
the jobs that
other English people could do.
We want to
give back to the country that
gave us education.
We want to -- when I grow up,
after I finish
university, I want to be paying
my taxes,
I want to be paying all of my
bills. The way
I was brought up was to give
back to the -- to
people that give to me.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The campaign
has also generated
quiet despair in Professor
Stephen Bazire,
a leading pharmacist, his hobby,
railway modeling.
He believes Prime Minister David
Cameron's
pledge to hold the referendum
was a mistake
that could lead to the breakup
of the United
Kingdom.
STEPHEN BAZIRE, Pharmacist: I'm
quite worried
that there will be a lot of
vindictiveness
going around between pros and
antis. And I
don't see Britain becoming at
all united as
a result of this, because if the
result is
very close, then you will have
people who
really are quite worried about
staying in
Europe and people who are quite
worried about
leaving Europe, and will be
blaming each other.
And Scotland will probably then
go for another
referendum and will probably
leave. Wales
might well do the same. And I
think we become
little Englanders then, again,
rather than
being part of a wider community.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Only the voters
can now decide
whether the Brexit express is a
runaway train
that may lead to the shrinking
of world's
fifth largest economy. If
Britain votes leave,
there can be no turning back,
and no one seems
to know what the consequences
will be.
For the "PBS NewsHour," this is
Malcolm Brabant
in East Anglia.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The American
middle class is
shrinking and struggling. The
six-year-long
economic recovery is showing
some signs of
slowing. And the pronounced
wealth divide
in the U.S. may get worse
without bigger steps.
That warning was part of a new
report issued
today about the U.S. economy by
the International
Monetary Fund.
I sat down with its managing
director, Christine
Lagarde, at IMF headquarters
here in Washington
earlier today to hear more of
her concerns
about what's happening to the
middle class
and the poor, and what could be
done about
it.
Managing Director Christine
Lagarde, thank
you for talking with us.
CHRISTINE LAGARDE, Managing
Director, International
Monetary Fund: Pleasure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, this latest
report from
the IMF looks at the American
economy, says
it is in good shape overall,
shows resiliency,
but then it goes on to point out
a number
of factors that provide concern
for the future.
And one of them has to do with
the shrinkage
of the American middle class.
What do you
and your colleagues see, and
what concerns
you?
CHRISTINE LAGARDE: We are seeing
a shrinking
of the middle class.
If you look at the size of the
middle class
in 1975, it was roughly 60
percent of total
population. If you look at the
middle class
today, it is about 50 percent.
So, that's
a significant decline of the
middle class.
And it is an economic issue,
because the middle
class has always been the
consumption force
of this nation.
The upper class doesn't spend as
much. The
lower class doesn't have as much
to spend.
So, the maximum impact in terms
of consumption
is generated by the middle
class.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What's happening
here? You
also write in the report your
concern about
the so-called labor force
participation rate,
the number of people who are
actually working.
And we know that there is
concern about the
number of men and women who are
able to find
a job. What do you see there?
CHRISTINE LAGARDE: What we are
seeing is something
that affects us all, which is
aging.
The U.S. population is aging,
like in other
economies of the world, and, as
a result,
the participation of active
workers in the
economy is declining. Now, we
cannot stop
the course of time, but what
policies can
do is encourage people who are
not joining
the workplace, the job market,
to actually
do so.
And I would point to a couple of
policies.
One is support given to women.
And, by that,
I mean maternity leave policy
that would help
them face the decision of, do I
stay or do
I go? Second, child care
support, and not
just child actually, but the
kind of support
that would help families look
after a child
or look after an elderly,
because, with aging,
we will have to support more
parents or grandparents.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you're
describing a real
squeeze on the middle class in
this country.
CHRISTINE LAGARDE: Yes, there is
that squeeze.
And that's where you head in the
directions
of people feeling insecure,
people not wanting
to move from one job to the
other, people
not spending as much as they
would otherwise
do.
Those behaviors, those decisions
have an economic
impact on our growth.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Help us
understand, what's
the connection with the overall
economy?
CHRISTINE LAGARDE: Well, the
major engine
for growth in this country and
in quite a
few advanced economies as well
is typically
consumption.
When the U.S. consumer consumes,
there is
demand, more demand, and,
therefore, the U.S.
manufacturers must manufacture
more. If they
have to manufacture more, they
have to create
more jobs. It's a fairly simple
virtuous circle
that is generally initiated by
consumption.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A number of
remedies you lay
out would cost money. They would
require action
by the Congress at a time when
this country
is very politically polarized.
How realistic
do you think your
recommendations are at a
time like this?
CHRISTINE LAGARDE: I see one
area where there
is some agreement.
And that's on the Earned Income
Tax Credit,
which, if combined with the
minimum wage increase,
would certainly bring people up
and would
boost consumption. So, on the
Earned Income
Tax Credit, there seems to be
common ground.
I hope we can find many of those
small-ticket
items which will push the
envelope further
and increase growth in the U.S.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And if these
remedies that
you lay out are not enacted,
what's your concern
for the future of the economy?
CHRISTINE LAGARDE: You know, if
those issues
such as low participation in the
labor force,
increased poverty, reduced
productivity and
polarization in terms of income
are not addressed,
then the U.S. economy will face
what I have
called this new mediocre, where
potential
growth is lower, there is
growth, there is
a degree of recovery, but not
sufficiently
to bring people out of those
poverty levels
that we talked about, not enough
to increase
the middle class, and not enough
to address
the unemployment of those who
are still looking
for jobs.
But those forces, poverty,
participation,
productivity, and polarization
of income,
are there to stay unless they
are addressed.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally, a
different question.
Voters go to the polls tomorrow
in Great Britain
to say one way or another
whether their country
should leave the European Union.
You have
been clear. You have made public
statements
about how you think this, if it
happens, would
be harmful to Great Britain, to
other parts
of the world.
How do you see the effect on the
United States
if there is a vote to leave,
Brexit, to leave
the European Union?
CHRISTINE LAGARDE: Well, if the
U.K. decided
to leave the European Union,
there would be
some effect on the U.S. economy.
How big that
effect would be, difficult to
say.
There are two channels of
communication of
uncertainty and lack of demand.
One is through
trade, less trade between the
U.S. and the
U.K. most likely. But it's not a
huge volume.
So that impact would be
relatively low.
However, on the financial front,
because of
the role played by London as a
financial center,
because of the potential impact
on volatility,
on the anxiety of people who
then sort of
fly to -- fly their money to
safe havens,
then there could be a
significant impact on
the U.S. economy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Americans
should be watching
closely?
CHRISTINE LAGARDE: I think we
should all be
watching closely, yes. And I
hope the right
decision is made, but it's for
the U.K. people
to decide.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Christine
Lagarde, the managing
director of the IMF, thank you
very much.
CHRISTINE LAGARDE: Thank you,
Judy.
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": a
high schooler
creates a device that turns
breath into words;
efforts for more racially
integrated classrooms;
and a plea to adopt the metric
system in the
U.S.
But, first: The president and
Congress have
reached rare agreement on a new
law that will
regulate everyday toxic
chemicals. The president
signed it today, setting in
motion the biggest
changes in four decades.
The Environmental Protection
Agency now has
new authority to review and
eventually restrict
or ban tens of thousands of
chemicals that
could be carcinogenic or
otherwise harm human
health, among them, substances
found in household
detergents and cleansers, flame
retardants
and furniture.
But it may take a while.
Lisa Desjardins joins us to fill
in the picture.
Lisa, why is this significant?
LISA DESJARDINS: This is
incredibly significant.
We're talking about a vast
universe of things
that we touch in our everyday
lives. Some
estimate that one out of every
three sort
of processed products that we
buy, not food,
but everything else, could have
toxic chemicals
in it.
And what happened, Gwen, was the
law passed
40 years ago was essentially
toothless. So
the EPA wasn't even able to
regulate forcefully
something like asbestos, which
we know from
scientific evidence is lethal
and may -- causes
a lethal form of cancer, but yet
it's not
banned because the law
previously wasn't strong
enough.
GWEN IFILL: You and I both have
covered Washington
for a while. We know how hard it
is to get
bipartisan agreement on
anything. Why this,
why now?
LISA DESJARDINS: Imagine.
GWEN IFILL: Wow.
LISA DESJARDINS: Nothing is
getting done in
Washington. A sweeping bill over
an $800 billion
industry? Well, that's the
answer. The industry
got on board.
The chemical industry felt this
was in their
interest because, up until now,
they have
self-regulated and states have
regulated,
Gwen. So the chemical industry
has dealt with
50 different sets of laws across
this country.
They found that it was in their
interest at
this time to have a national
law, have the
EPA take this over.
So what we're going to have now
from this
law is the EPA having dominance,
being able
to override states, with some
exceptions,
in general when it comes to
chemical safety.
GWEN IFILL: There are so many
different arguments
on either side of this.
LISA DESJARDINS: Yes.
GWEN IFILL: One is that this is
the best it
could get and this is a strong,
big move.
What is the argument for that?
LISA DESJARDINS: Right.
So let's talk about supporters.
They feel
like this was something that was
a long time
coming, that these are dangerous
chemicals
that are unregulated and could
explain things
like, oh, autism or cancer. We
don't know
if they do, but the question is,
no one is
investigating. Now the EPA can
investigate.
So that group includes people
like Tom Udall
of New Mexico. And he spoke to
us about this
law.
REP. TOM UDALL (D), New Mexico:
The first
thing to realize, we're doing
zero today.
We're not doing any chemicals
today. And so
what this bill does is stand up
the agency
to get working in a really
constructive way
on chemicals.
There are going to be many
chemicals, and
that's why I think many
chemicals that aren't
addressed in the first couple
years, and that's
why I would urge the states to
get out there
and to regulate.
GWEN IFILL: And yet, Lisa, there
are people
who don't think that this goes
far enough,
not only members of Congress,
but a lot of
people involved in activist
groups.
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
This bill tried
to address a problem of scale,
but it has
a problem of scale.
Let's look at a graphic
explaining this. As
we mentioned earlier in this
segment, there
are some 84,000 chemicals that
the EPA has
yet to review and now can
review. But the
problem is how long it takes to
do that. Under
this law, the EPA is required to
examine at
least 20 of those chemicals
within a four-year
time span.
That gives you a sense of how
long it takes
to go through each of these
chemicals. And
some who are nervous about this
bill say,
realistically, we're in the sure
this is even
going to scratch the surface of
the problem.
Someone who has those questions
is Scott Faber
with the Environmental Working
Group. He talked
to us for this story.
SCOTT FABER, Environmental
Working Group:
The bill provides half as much
money as the
agency needs just to get through
the thousand
most dangerous chemicals out of
many thousands
of chemicals that are used in
commerce.
Certainly, if you ask the
question, is this
law better than what we have on
the books,
the answer is yes. If you ask
the question,
does this law give EPA the
ability to quickly
review and regulate the most
dangerous chemicals,
the answer is almost certainly
no.
GWEN IFILL: That's not the most
enthusiastic
-- in fact, not criticism or
endorsement.
LISA DESJARDINS: And yet groups
like this
still signed on, because they
feel like this
is better than nothing, which is
exactly what
you heard.
And I think it's because this is
sort of an
invisible problem. When we say
this is a huge
amount of products, it's a vast
number of
products, baby bottles, car
seats, mattresses.
Even, Gwen, something like the
necklace I'm
wearing right now, I know you
will be shocked
that it's not real gems. It
probably is made
of chemicals that are
unregulated. We don't
know what these are doing in our
lives.
And they're saying something is
better than
nothing, but we will see what
actually happens
in reality.
GWEN IFILL: Now, we say
unregulated. They
were unregulated by the federal
government.
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
That's right.
GWEN IFILL: But states often
were able to
regulate a lot of these
substances.
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
And that was one of the final
pivot points
to making this bill become
reality, that some
Democrats, including Democrats
from California,
like Barbara Boxer, where they
have some of
the strongest regulations on
these chemicals,
were concerned about this.
And they ended up carving out an
exemption
where some of the laws they
already have on
the books will stay on the
books. But, going
forward, anything passed after
2015 by the
states can be overridden by the
EPA. It has
to go out of its way to do it,
but that can
happen.
GWEN IFILL: It really sounds a
little bit
to me, however, as if states are
being deprived
of some of their role. Usually,
the argument
on Capitol Hill is that the
states -- or even
at the Supreme Court -- that the
states should
have more power, not less.
LISA DESJARDINS: Well, that's
the argument,
I think, that states are making
clearly, and
some of the opponents of this
law are very
concerned about.
But think about it. This is not
the only issue
where we have seen this trend.
How about CAFE
standards, the mileage
requirements for our
vehicles? Those used to be state
by state.
Under President Obama, those
were raised,
so that carmakers had to make
our cars more
fuel-efficient on a national
level. Previously,
it had been on a state level.
GWEN IFILL: The argument being
that a patchwork
series of law didn't apply to
everybody equally.
LISA DESJARDINS: Right, and
especially that
it was a burden on the product
makers, the
manufacturers that had to --
could make a
product that fit 50 different
sets of rules.
GWEN IFILL: It's fascinating,
the way things
get done in Washington,
sometimes not done
on some days like today.
LISA DESJARDINS: And surprising,
but this
really did happen.
GWEN IFILL: It really did
happen.
Lisa Desjardins, thank you so
much.
LISA DESJARDINS: My pleasure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Next: a promising
and affordable
technology that could give voice
literally
to people unable to speak.
Fred de Sam Lazaro reports from
India. It's
part of our weekly series
covering The Leading
Edge of science.
ARSH SHAH DILBAGI, Inventor: Hi.
My name is
Arsh Shah Dilbagi. I'm from
Panipat, India.
I love robots. I'm good at
computer science
and math. And I wish to change
the world.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: He was 15
when he made
this video two years ago, as a
finalist in
Google's Science Fair, with a
smartphone-sized
device called TALK that converts
breath into
speech.
COMPUTER VOICE: TALK is an
innovative device
for people with developmental
disabilities.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: He is also
savvy at marketing,
abundantly displayed on social
media.
Here he is giving a TED Talk in
Mumbai:
ARSH SHAH DILBAGI: I felt that,
as long as
you are breathing, you should be
able to live,
truly live.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: He's always
like to tinker,
he says. When his parents gave
him a LEGO
kit, instead of a dog, there was
only one
thing to do.
ARSH SHAH DILBAGI: I made a
little dog out
of the LEGO kit.
The very fact that we humans are
capable of
creating machines which can be
more capable
than we ever can be, that is
fascinating.
That's just like cheating
evolution.
Over the years, learned
locomotion, how to
control motors, how to put
things together,
how to make robots better.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: He learned
to turn toys
into tools. The idea for the
speech device
began when he accompanied his
grandmother
to the hospital, he says, and
saw a severely
speech-impaired Parkinson's
disease patient.
ARSH SHAH DILBAGI: I researched
about everything
I could about all the speech
impediments.
That research went on for a long
time. And
after that, I decided, OK, there
are problems
that I found out with the
currently available
solutions.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: He says
devices now on
the market, like the one used by
one of his
favorite authors, Stephen
Hawking, all require
a laptop computer, they can be
invasive, and
they are, of course, expensive,
well beyond
vast majority of people,
especially in India.
He doesn't recall the actual
light bulb moment,
when the idea popped in his
brain for a breath-driven
interface, breath through either
nose or mouth.
ARSH SHAH DILBAGI: The user has
to give sharp
bursts or long bursts from the
nose, which
are interpreted as Morse code.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: As he points
out in his
own promotional online videos,
he had to learn
how a machine learns as he built
on the idea.
ARSH SHAH DILBAGI: I had this
computation
engine which could take in
signals through
a microphone, distinguish noise
and normal
breathing, a single exhale and a
double exhale.
Once I had that, I developed an
entire library
wherein those signals were put
into Morse
code and then into English
alphabet.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The next
step, miniaturize
the hardware.
ARSH SHAH DILBAGI: And this has
a little speaker.
And it just goes in like that.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Some 35 of
them are now
being tested by users across
India. Their
feedback is expected by this
summer, in the
first step of a long, uncertain
journey from
prototype to an actual product.
We showed the device to Ben
Munson, a speech
scientist at the University of
Minnesota.
BENJAMIN MUNSON, University of
Minnesota:
I have high hopes for him, but
this device
itself, I think, is going to be
of limited
impact.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Munson said
the TALK device
requires far too much lung
control and effort
in a typical user a Parkinson's
patient, for
instance, couldn't muster.
Nonetheless, he
sees potential.
BENJAMIN MUNSON: It's extremely
clever. He's
marketing the Wright brothers'
plane as the
Concorde or something.
But the fact is that we live in
a day and
age where you can see in your
lifetime the
evolution in different
technologies going
from the Wright brothers' plane
all the way
up to the Concorde.
And this device very well may
prove to be
useful for a subset of the
population with
degenerative conditions.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: More
immediately, Arsh
Dilbagi, like so many high
school seniors,
is focused on transitioning to
college life.
He's headed this fall to
Princeton.
For the "PBS NewsHour," this is
Fred de Sam
Lazaro in Panipat, India.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Fred's reporting
is part of
our Breakthrough series and a
partnership
with the Under-Told Stories
Project at Saint
Mary's University in Minnesota.
GWEN IFILL: The U.S. Justice
Department recently
hailed a federal court ruling
affirming plans
to desegregate schools in
Cleveland, Mississippi.
Desegregation, the court ruled,
allows students
to learn, play and thrive
together.
As part of her year-long look at
solutions
to racism, special correspondent
Charlayne
Hunter-Gault talks with a
teacher on how to
successfully teach in integrated
settings.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: The
percentage of
black and Latino students in
what's being
called apartheid schools is on
the increase,
and yet most schools seem
ill-prepared to
help those students be the best
they can be,
while reducing prejudice and
teaching them
to learn to live with each
other.
But Maureen Costello of the
Southern Poverty
Law Center says there are ways
to achieve
all three.
Maureen Costello, thank you for
joining us.
MAUREEN COSTELLO, Southern
Poverty Law Center:
Thank you.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: The
Southern Poverty
Law Center has a curriculum that
looks at
teaching tolerance in schools.
What caused
that to happen?
MAUREEN COSTELLO: Well, before
we started
this program, we were fighting
hate crimes,
basically.
Morris Dees, our founder, was
bringing civil
suits against groups like the
Klan, and often
the young men who had committed
some terrible
acts against others were
motivated by terrible,
terrible hatred and just
complete misunderstanding
of what other people were like.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: It was
mostly race
at that point.
MAUREEN COSTELLO: It was usually
race, although,
sometimes, it was also
ethnicity.
But he was seeing 19- and
20-year-old perpetrators
who were going to spend the rest
of their
lives in prison. And he said,
you know, we
have to do something to stop
this before it
starts. And he said, we need a
school program.
And that really was the
beginning of teaching
tolerance. Let's find the best
research we
can find about how we can reduce
prejudice
starting at early ages, and
let's get it out
there to teachers.
One of the issues in American
education is
that 80 percent of our teachers
are white
women.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: In the
whole country?
MAUREEN COSTELLO: Yes. And I'm
not saying
white women can't teach, because
I am a white
woman, and I did teach for a
very, very long
time.
But they bring in all of their
own expectations
and beliefs into class. And
teachers have
to kind of constantly examine
those and say,
wait a minute, am I making some
judgments
here that I shouldn't be making?
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: How do
you then deal
with such an equation?
MAUREEN COSTELLO: American
classrooms are
diverse as a whole, but, in
fact, when you
get down to individual
classrooms and individual
schools, we see a lot of the
diversity fade
away.
So, we have schools today that
are more segregated
than they have been in the last
25 years were.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: This is
even in public
schools?
MAUREEN COSTELLO: Absolutely,
absolutely.
There's real disparities.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: So how
do you get
a handle on that?
MAUREEN COSTELLO: Every
teacher's job and
the job of school is to help
students develop
the skills that they need to
thrive in a diverse
society.
Lots of people think it's a
natural thing.
We're all born open-minded, and
then we learn
to become bigots. And the fact
is, that's
not necessarily true. You have
to actually
develop skills to cross
boundaries. And we
look at it three ways. We say,
OK, first of
all, we want to reduce
prejudice, which means
dismantle stereotypes as much as
possible.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: How do
you do that?
MAUREEN COSTELLO: You challenge
them. You
get kids to explore stereotypes
about their
own group. And once they
recognize that the
stereotypes of their group are
not really
real, you ask them to look at
other stereotypes
in other groups.
A stereotype is simply a box.
It's a very
convenient one. It helps us
categorize people.
We're natural categorizers. But
real people
don't all fit in the box. And so
what we have
to do is help students
understand that there
is no single story.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: What do
you do to
break through some of these
problems?
MAUREEN COSTELLO: We provide
resources for
teachers.
And one of the main resources is
a curriculum.
So, we have a curriculum called
Perspectives
for a Diverse America. And at
its heart are
a series of texts that we have
chosen because
they're either windows or
mirrors.
Windows. Windows are how I can
look outside
and I can see experiences and
lives that are
different than mine. And that's
something
we have always said is important
in education,
is to learn about other people
and how other
people live.
Mirrors are where I can see
myself reflected
in the books that I'm reading.
And, of course,
that's important too, and it's
particularly
important for a child of color,
for a child
who perhaps has immigrant
parents, for children
living in poverty, to recognize
that they're
not on the outside, that they
can be the heroes
of their own story, too.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: So where
do they get
those books and that material?
MAUREEN COSTELLO: We have it in
our Web site,
Perspectives for a Diverse
America. Many of
them are from published works.
And we have
chosen them because they help
teachers explore
the issues -- the areas of
identity, diversity,
justice, and action, which we
consider to
be really the key parts of
teaching tolerance.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Do you
find that teachers
around the country want this
kind of information,
and how are they responding?
MAUREEN COSTELLO: The feedback
we're getting
is, we need this. Thank goodness
you have
it. And we need to incorporate
it into our
everyday lessons.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: And how
are you disseminating
this?
MAUREEN COSTELLO: We have it
available for
free on the Web site. We have a
social media
page on Facebook. We have a
Twitter channel.
And we send newsletters to
teachers. So we
have this kind of virtual
community of about
half-a-million teachers.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: How
important is taking
these issues on in school?
MAUREEN COSTELLO: I think it's
incredibly
important.
First of all, schools are one of
the few institutions
we have left that, in some ways,
we all share.
It's one of those few common
institutions.
Every child goes to school. And
they go home
and they have conversations with
their parents.
But the more important thing is
that, you
know, let's remember the
original purpose
of schools. It had a civic
mission. Schools
are supposed to take young
people and not
just equip them for jobs and not
just equip
them to make money, but to equip
them to be
citizens who can analyze issues,
take action,
take informed action, and stand
up for each
other, and stand up for the
ideals that we
believe in.
And so we think that this is
something that
belongs in school, belongs in
every school.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Well,
Maureen Costello,
thank you for joining us.
MAUREEN COSTELLO: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We return to the
U.S. Capitol
now, but for a different form of
speaking
out.
The light sentencing of a
Stanford University
swimmer for sexually assaulting
an unconscious
woman sparked outage across the
country and
in Congress.
The story prompted New Hampshire
Congresswoman
Ann McLane Kuster to share her
own experience
with sexual assault during a
speech on the
House floor Tuesday night.
REP. ANN MCLANE KUSTER (D), New
Hampshire:
I was an 18-year-old student. I
was going
to a dance. The dance was at a
fraternity,
and I intended to enjoy the
evening with my
friends.
We danced. We listened to music.
We enjoyed
the evening, and we enjoyed the
party, until
one young man assaulted me in a
crude and
insulting way, and I ran, alone,
into the
cold dark night.
I have never forgotten that
night. I was filled
with shame, regret, humiliation,
while he
was egged on by everyone at that
party standing
by.
Several years later, I was
working as a legislative
assistant right here on Capitol
Hill, and
I was assaulted again, this time
by a distinguished
guest of the United States
Congress. I was
23 years old, and as Judge Poe
referenced
tonight, I didn't say a word to
anyone.
And, in fact, until I wrote
these words to
share with you tonight, I had
never told anyone
this story. My family didn't
know, my husband
my children, my friends.
I tell these stories tonight on
the floor
of the United States Congress
not because
they are remarkable or unique.
Sadly, I tell
these stories because they are
all too common,
and, tonight, we will not be
silent anymore.
Tonight, we stand together,
Republicans and
Democrats, mothers and sisters,
from across
the country to take a stand for
liberty and
justice for all.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Congresswoman
Kuster also called
for more accountability and
education about
sexual assault on college
campuses and in
communities.
GWEN IFILL: Finally tonight, we
return to
one of -- another of our
periodic essays.
There are many hot topics under
debate in
2016. Bestselling author Daniel
Pink wants
us to focus on one issue not
making headlines,
how the metric system measures
up.
DANIEL PINK, Author: This is my
phone. Like
many of you, I use it to check
the temperature.
And right now, a spring
afternoon in Washington,
D.C., my phone says that,
outside, it's 16
degrees.
That's not a mistake. That's
Celsius. And
I'm not a crank or a Canadian.
It's just that,
a few years ago, I went metric,
and it's time
for you and the rest of America
to join me.
Let me take you back in time,
the 1970s, Columbus,
Ohio. I'm in third grade. One
day, Mrs. Williams
tells us something amazing. In a
few years,
she says, the United States will
go fully
metric.
Four decades later, I'm still
waiting, all
84 kilograms of me. Today, only
two other
countries still have not
embraced the metric
system, Liberia and Myanmar. But
metric is
a good idea whose time has
finally come.
On the muddy racetrack of 2016,
it now offers
a rare political trifecta. It's
good for business,
good for international harmony
and good for
kids.
Begin with business. Getting our
organizations
on a single standard will avoid
mistakes like
the one a while back when a $125
million Mars
orbiter exploded because NASA
was using the
international standard, but its
contractor
was using pounds. Metric makes
international
trade easier and smoother and
eliminates duplication
in manufacturing and labeling.
Next, international relations.
America has
a tattered image overseas, but
going metric
can help mend that by showing
we're ready,
willing and able to work with
the rest of
the world.
And, finally, children, those
little creatures
every candidate says are the
future. Our kids'
future is global and high-tech.
Well, 95 percent
of the globe has already gone
metric. So has
100 percent of science and
technology. Just
as kids in China are racing to
learn English,
the world's linguistic standard,
shouldn't
American kids be mastering
metric, the world's
measurement standard?
There's another advantage I have
learned from
my own conversion to liters and
meters. Metric
is easier than the Liberian
system. Believe
me, it's much simpler to divide
by 10 and
100 than by eight and 12.
There's even evidence that, when
prescriptions
calls for doses in milliliters
and come with
a metric dispenser, people make
far fewer
mistakes than when dosages are
in teaspoons,
which raises another question.
Teaspoons? It's two-and-a-half
centuries since
we broke from King George, and
our health
care system is using teaspoons?
We can do
better, America, but we will
have the lead
our politicians, instead of
waiting for them
to lead us.
So, take out your phones and
switch to Celsius.
Reset your bathroom scale to
kilograms. Maybe
even dump your yardsticks into
Boston Harbor.
Together, we can lead this
country into the
future, even if we have to do it
millimeter
by millimeter.
GWEN IFILL: All right.
You can find all of our essays
on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour/essays.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online right
now: 42 percent of grades in
four-year college
students get As, a major change
since the
1960s, when the most frequent
grade was a
C. On our Making Sense page, we
have a columnist
who compares grade inflation
with economic
inflation. All that and more is
on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And a news update before we go.
The speaker of the House, Paul
Ryan, has criticized
the Democratic sit-in taking
place in Congress.
On CNN, he called it a -- quote
-- "publicity
stunt."
Meanwhile, Democratic
congressional leaders
are still deciding whether to
stay in the
chamber through the night. Under
House rules,
they can leave and resume the
sit-in tomorrow.
GWEN IFILL: Tune in later
tonight on "Charlie
Rose": actress Olivia Wilde.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Thursday, Making Sense of how
high housing
prices are changing San
Francisco.
I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening. For all of us at the
"PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.